Create Rule “design-system/rule” (#10209)
SSWConsulting/SSW.Rules.Content: rules/design-system/rule.md

A design system can fix all of that—it aligns everyone around a shared language and provides the tools to build faster and better.

<!--endintro-->

`youtube: https://www.youtube.com/embed/YLo6g58vUm0`

**Video: Welcome to Design Systems – Lesson 1: Introduction to Design Systems (15 min)**

## Key Components

A solid design system should include:

- **Style guide and design tokens** – Brand guidelines, color variables, typography, iconography, spacing grids, and accessibility guidance.
- **Component library** – Reusable UI elements like buttons or inputs, built in your design tool with variants and usage guidance. May include page templates and broader patterns. 
- **Documentation** – Guidelines for component usage, do’s and don’ts, examples and demos.
- **Design system governance** – Clear ownership of the design system, a contribution process, tools for dev handover, and semantic versioning to manage updates.

## Why It Works

> - **One source of truth** – Everyone (designers, developers, PMs, QA) works from the same playbook.
> - **Change once, update everywhere** – Avoids manual rework and reduces inconsistencies.
> - **Faster builds** – Shared components and patterns boost delivery speed.
> - **Accessibility baked-in** – Standards like contrast, keyboard nav, and screen-reader support come by default.
> - **No more style debates** – Predefined standards cut through subjective design opinions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **One source of truth** – Everyone (designers, developers, POs, QA) works from the same playbook, avoiding continuous rework and reducing inconsistency. Changes are made in one place which scales across projects.
- **Faster build time** – Shared components and patterns boost delivery speed.
- **Accessibility baked-in** – Standards like contrast, keyboard nav, and screen-reader support come by default.
- **No more debates** – Defined design standards cut through subjective opinion.
```

---
type: rule
tips: ""
title: Do you have a Design System?
seoDescription: Tame visual inconsistencies and streamline team collaboration by
  building a design system that aligns your product, design, and engineering
  teams.
uri: design-system
authors:
  - title: Betty Bondoc
    url: https://www.ssw.com.au/people/betty-bondoc/
  - title: Jayden Alchin
    url: https://www.ssw.com.au/people/jayden-alchin/
related:
  - design-debt
  - software-for-ux-design
  - hand-over-mockups-to-developers
created: 2025-05-14T15:18:00.000Z
guid: cf1f0a03-8702-43ae-80d5-f44ac491edee
---

> When every button looks a little different, spacing feels off, and handoffs between design and dev are painful, you know something’s wrong. These issues lead to inconsistent UIs, longer review cycles, and time wasted on debating visual tweaks instead of building real value.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When every button looks a little different, spacing feels off, and handoffs between design and dev are painful, you know something’s wrong. These issues lead to inconsistent UI, longer review cycles, and time wasted debating visual tweaks instead of building real value.  
```

A design system can fix all of that—it aligns everyone around a shared language and provides the tools to build faster and better.

<!--endintro-->

`youtube: https://www.youtube.com/embed/YLo6g58vUm0`

**Video: Welcome to Design Systems – Lesson 1: Introduction to Design Systems (15 min)**

## Key Components

A solid design system should include:

> - **Design tokens** – Variables for color, spacing, typography, etc., ensuring consistency and scalability.
> - **Style guide** – Covers branding, grids, iconography, motion, and accessibility guidelines.
> - **Component library** – Reusable elements like buttons, forms, and modals built in your design tool with variants and usage guidance.
> - **Tooling integration** – Sync tokens to code using tools like Figma Tokens, Style Dictionary, or CI/CD pipelines.
> - **Documentation portal** – Live demos, usage do’s and don’ts, changelogs, and versioning.
> - **Governance** – Clear ownership, a contribution process, and semantic versioning to manage updates.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Style guide and design tokens** – Brand guidelines, color variables, typography, iconography, spacing grids, and accessibility guidance.
- **Component library** – Reusable UI elements like buttons or inputs, built in your design tool with variants and usage guidance. May include page templates and broader patterns. 
- **Documentation** – Guidelines for component usage, do’s and don’ts, examples and demos.
- **Design system governance** – Clear ownership of the design system, a contribution process, tools for dev handover, and semantic versioning to manage updates.
```

## Why It Works

- **One source of truth** – Everyone (designers, developers, PMs, QA) works from the same playbook.
- **Change once, update everywhere** – Avoids manual rework and reduces inconsistencies.
- **Faster builds** – Shared components and patterns boost delivery speed.
- **Accessibility baked-in** – Standards like contrast, keyboard nav, and screen-reader support come by default.
- **No more style debates** – Predefined standards cut through subjective design opinions.

## Signs You’re Due for a Design System

- Spacing, fonts, or colors shift between screens for no reason.
- Handoffs and review meetings are dominated by nitpicking visual issues.

> - Figma doesn’t match production.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Design doesn’t match production.
```

---
type: rule
tips: ""
title: Do you have a Design System?
seoDescription: Tame visual inconsistencies and streamline team collaboration by
  building a design system that aligns your product, design, and engineering
  teams.
uri: design-system
authors:

>   - title: ""

Author: ```suggestion
```
